---
title: "Evidence of .Ia supernova detonations in 3D hydrodynamical simulations of double degenerate mergers"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/20250710-evidence_of_dotIa
excerpt: ''
date: 2025-07-10
venue: 'Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society'
paperurl: 'https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/541/3/2216/8196109'
citation: 'Uri Pierre Burmester, Lilia Ferrario, Rüdiger Pakmor, Ivo R Seitenzahl, Evidence of .Ia supernova detonations in 3D hydrodynamical simulations of double degenerate mergers, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 541, Issue 3, August 2025, Pages 2216–2230, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staf1128'
---
We report detailed 3D simulations of 1.1 $M_{\odot}$ Oxygen-Neon (ONe) white dwarfs (WDs) merging with a 0.35 $M_{\odot}$ helium WD, conducted with the moving-mesh hydrodynamic code AREPO. The simulations utilise self-consistent chemical profiles for the primary WD which were generated by a stellar evolution code incorporating the effects of semi-degenerate carbon burning. We find that a helium detonation is ignited at the base of the helium layer, starting a thermonuclear runaway which encircles the WD and ejects material as a sub-luminous supernovae. Our canonical simulation, (C-120), ejects 0.103 $M_{\odot}$ of primarily $^{4}\mathrm{He}$, $^{28}\mathrm{Si}$, and $^{32}\mathrm{S}$, after which the primary begins accreting again from the surviving secondary. Our results depend qualitatively on the "inspiral time" simulation parameter, which describes the length of a period of accelerated angular momentum loss. For example, the binary does not survive when inspiral time is too long. We compare the results using our self-consistent chemical profiles to a constant-composition WD structure and find the same explosion pattern when the inspiral time is short. However, we are able to obtain a typical Type Ia supernova (SN\,Ia) which destroys the primary by using the constant-composition structure and long inspiral. The shock-convergence in this simulation follows the "x-scissor mechanism" described by Gronow et al. in 2020, and causes a secondary detonation due to higher temperatures and higher number density of $^{12}\mathrm{C}$ at the convergence site. These results highlight the potential for unrealistic outcomes when conducting simulations that incorporate unrealistically large enhancements in angular momentum losses and (or) non-realistic chemical structures for the primary WD.

[Download paper here](https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/541/3/2216/8196109)

